Crypto can be rife with jargon, especially in the NFT space, where terms like coins, tokens, currencies, assets, multi-assets..etc are often used interchangeably. Sometimes use cases overlap and tokens fit into multiple categories. A reminder we have a supporting glossary for this course which you can review as needed.

Almost everything in Cardano can be traced back to the research papers. Native Assets are no different, with the original concept discussed in the Native Custom Tokens in the Extended UTXO Model paper. 

Cardano has the unique ability to create, interact with, and delete bespoke tokens (or 'assets') natively. When we say 'native', we mean that, in addition to sending and receiving the official currency ada, you may interact with custom assets right out of the box - without the need for smart contracts. Fungible and non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are both native assets treated as 'first class citizens', meaning they have the same capabilities as ada in every sense because the functionality is already built into the protocol. This reduces complexity, making it easier for developers, and opens up new uses. Cardano's native assets function based on a set of rules that govern the creation, issuance, and management of native tokens on the Cardano blockchain. 

This design has broad ramifications, for example, all the security features that apply to ada, automatically apply to your token. Multi-asset support is written into the integration with centralized exchanges, so now it’s easy for exchanges to list your newly minted token. Also, everything that comes with the governance stack, the voting mechanics seamlessly work for your token as well. No code has to be rewritten, it’s a ‘batteries included’ turnkey solution.

The creation and transfer of native tokens cost a fraction of transaction fees on other chains. You can check how much something will cost in advance and it won’t spike later just because the network is busy. This predictability is referred to as determinism. Native tokens are scalable because they do not require the use of a separate layer for smart contracts. This makes it possible to transfer a large number of digital assets in one transaction to multiple wallet addresses. Native assets are flexible and can be customized to meet the specific needs of different dApps.

Native tokens are more secure because they are managed by the Cardano ledger itself, which makes them transparent and auditable. The policy is set by the user who wishes to mint the new asset. The node checks adherence to minting policies when a transaction is processed by running the code or checking for the required signatures. Transaction data must satisfy the minting policies of all assets the transaction is attempting to mint.

Native tokens represent value and act as an accounting unit, so they can be used for payments and transactions in the same way as ada is. While ada is used as Cardano’s main currency for fees and rewards today, there is a clear path laid out in a research paper (Babel Fees via Limited Liabilities) on how users can potentially pay transaction fees in native tokens in future. Cardano is designed so the eUTXO model and native asset design work seamlessly together with efficiency and robust security properties built in. Cardano’s design decisions enable unique features such as a token bundle which is a mix of tokens scoped under one or more minting policies. Any tokens can be bundled together, including ada. You can see how powerful this feature can be by reviewing some of the ‘records’ on eutxo.org

Unlike Ethereum’s ERC20 standard, native tokens do not require special transfer fees or additional event-handling logic to track transactions. With Ethereum, ether is an asset and ERC20 is a smart contract, and both compete for resources while at the same time being treated differently by the blockchain. ERC20 token creation requires manual modification of the contract standard, which opens the door for human error and likelihood of bugs. There have been billions of dollars lost due to security issues resulting from such designs. 
