Interoperability is defined as the ability of blockchain networks to talk to each other, enabling secure transactions, and transfer of digital assets and tokens. Mass adoption is also dependent on enabling interoperability with the legacy financial system, enabling users to onboard to, and exit from, the fiat currency world.  

In addition to inventing the first provably secure proof-of-stake protocol called Ouroboros, Professor Aggelos Kiaysis and his fellow researchers introduced a whole gamut of interoperability protocols such as NIPoPoWs (Non-Interactive Proofs of Proof-of-Work) and sidechain protocols.

If the different blockchains and systems don't have a seamless way to communicate with each other, everything works in silos and potential user bases are diluted. Sometimes it makes business sense for traditional rivals to partner for mutual benefit. Take cloud service providers, for example. Oracle database is available on Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services although they compete in many areas. 

Sidechains are a key enabler for interoperability. A sidechain is a blockchain in itself, linked to a main blockchain (the mainchain, or parent chain) through a two-way mechanism called a ‘bridge’. Digital assets from one chain can be utilized in another and the results shared back and forth. Multiple sidechains may be joined to a single parent chain, each of which can function in a different fashion. 
A sidechain can be thought of as just another blockchain, the difference between them is often philosophical, not technical. The sidechain typically aligns with the mainchain, but can have its own business logic, cryptocurrency, monetary policy, consensus rules, programming language, subset of users, smart-contract capabilities, stablecoins, use cases like NFTs, loyalty points, etc. 
Sidechains are suited to medium to low-risk protocols, where new, or growing ecosystems need a jump start, as the sidechain can leverage an existing mainchain’s security, liquidity, wallets, and user base. Sidechains can literally take a load off a layer 1 mainnet, all the while enjoying the veracity provided by its parent chain. Even if there is large transaction traffic on a sidechains, these transactions don’t need to be reconciled on the mainchain. A sidechain won’t eat up the resources from its parent mainchain. 

As you might expect at this stage, a lot of deep thought and academic rigour went into Cardano’s architecture. Another example is in how rewards incentivize sidechain partnerships. Ada holders who delegate their stake get rewarded in ada, however, the same SPOs that power the mainchain, will also provide staking liquidity for sidechains. The result is, if the SPO you delegate to is also part of the sidechain SPO subset, you will also be rewarded in that sidechain’s native asset,in addition to your usual ada rewards. 

The ‘Why Cardano’ essay from 2017 describes the vision for a layered architecture. The strategy and terminology was updated slightly in 2023. The new model would mean there would still be separation of layers. The Cardano Asset and Settlement Layer (CASL) will act as a proven, robust settlement layer for partner chains, while the Cardano Service Layers (CSL) mirrors the philosophy of microservices, or service oriented architecture. 

You can think of Partner chains as an extension of the side chains concept. Midnight is muted to be the first of its kind. Midnight will be a 4th generation blockchain as it will enable data protection and follow a multi-resource consensus model, leveraging both proof-of-work and proof-of-stake simultaneously. Advancements in zero knowledge proofs will enable data and metadata to be protected. Blockchains can’t keep a secret today, Midnight aims to introduce this capability and with it a new world of use cases.

Partner Chains will have the flexibility to construct their own computation layers using modular components while still leveraging the CASL. Each (CSL) service layer can have its own distinct logic with unique tokenomics, consensus protocol, etc, but they will all have the same ‘common ancestor’ in the CASL. 


This design will mean Cardano could potentially be the settlement layer for other blockchains. Security will be provided by Cardano’s SPOs as before, but now multi resource consensus will allow validators from other chains to contribute. The introduction of Babel fees (still in research) will allow chains to integrate smoothly as users will be able to transact in their own native currency, while Cardano SPOs can still be rewarded in ada.
