As we discussed, Cardano’s consensus protocol, Ouroboros, rewards delegators and stake pool operators with rewards as they contribute to securing the network. The Cardano ledger specifications outline formulas to calculate these rewards. Bearing this in mind, the Cardano Foundation has open sourced a node-independent reward calculation. The project intends to achieve a means of performing and validating the rewards calculation that is independent of a single implementation. It also looks to provide comprehensive documentation related to Cardano’s treasury, reserves, and pool rewards. This is complemented by a recent white paper Cardano Economic Parameters published by Cardano Foundation with Professor Massimo Morini. 

As an open source repository under the MIT license, the initiative also deepens the Foundation’s commitment towards open source maturity and aims to garner contributions from the ecosystem at large. Moreover, the calculation can equally serve as an educational tool to demonstrate how protocol parameter changes could impact the flow of funds. It ultimately enhances transparency and improves operational resilience. 

The Cardano blockchain offers several unique, carefully considered features. A key one is that staked ada remains in user wallets, enabling transfers to other wallets at any time. While this functionality has benefits, it also presents challenges in implementing rewards calculations. This necessitates the use of snapshots for rewards calculation, as outlined in the ledger specification.  
