The treasury, reserves, rewards, deposits, and fees, sometimes referred to as ada-pots, sum up to the max supply of 45 billion ada. While anyone can review ada-pot numbers on Cardano blockchain explorers and on Cardano DB Sync, these platforms only supply the final output of the calculations, without any underlying data available to confirm how those were calculated. Although these calculations exist in the Haskell code of the node and the ledger repositories, they employ a complex, highly distributed formula implementation not originally meant to act as public documentation.  

There is also the "time" component. For example, figuring out the total rewards pot of an early epoch (prior to epoch 350) would require jumping back in the git history of each repository, as the formula adjusted over time, and rules changed during hard forks.
 
For this reason, the Foundation started pursuing a node-independent reward calculation that implements the formulas outlined in the Cardano ledger specifications and serves as documentation for handling edge cases where the specified formula does not align with the actual implementation.   

In short, without knowledge of such extraordinary events, it would prove challenging to trace the discrepancy between the formula and the treasury value and there would be less funds in the treasury than indicated by the formula. 

The rewards calculation was originally integrated into Ledger Sync, the Java-based data pipeline developed to supply the Cardano Foundation’s new Cardano explorer with data from the Cardano blockchain. However, the Foundation’s Engineering Team soon realized that untangling the multiple components involved in different aspects of the calculation would prove quite complex. The diversity of input data means that gathering the necessary information from various sources to comprehensively understand the flow of ada becomes particularly time-consuming.

Open sourcing the rewards calculation, on the other hand, can empower public inspection, review, and verification of the algorithm, as well as the code used to determine how rewards are distributed. This approach similarly helps build trust in the Cardano infrastructure by serving as a repository that includes an interactive chart explaining the ada flow at the end of an epoch, plus reports that highlight the differences between the formula and actual value. 

Open sourcing the rewards calculation also acts as a useful way to educate < USE ICON for ‘educate’> people about Cardano’s decentralized treasury system and provides insights into the use of transaction fees. The open source repository serves as both a testbed for validating the ledger rules and ada pot values and a Java library used by yaci-store, a scoped chain indexer, to deliver rewards data without the need for DB Sync, which is a Haskell tool for crawling node data and then accessing it through a PostgreSQL database. 
