# What is Open Source?

Open Source is a decentralized software development model focused on public collaboration. At large, the terms referred to any form of public access to the source material of a particular product design. It embeds ideas of open exchange, community-driven development, public governance and, of course, public access to and distribution of the source material. While it is still mainly present in the software industry, the term 'Open Source' extends to other engineering areas and sciences such as electronics, automotive, robotics and medicine.

For the rest of this unit, we will mainly talk about Open Source in the context of software engineering. Open-source software is, therefore, software in which source code is publicly available. It can be used, enhanced, shared and modified under specific conditions. This approach contrasts with the more traditional, proprietary software development methods. Nowadays, we often talk about closed-source software when referring to proprietary software.

While publicly available, open-source projects cannot generally be modified by just _anyone_. Projects are typically safeguarded by teams of maintainers whose role is to not only develop the project further but also to assess and manage contributions made to the project. Maintainers are typically the main contributors to open-source projects. And they define the framework for contributing to it. Many times, maintainers themselves have a direct interest in the project for their business activities, and they see Open Source as a way to enhance or accelerate the project's development.

## Open Source vs Free Software

The term Open Source was coined around 1980, and its origin is prominently attributed to Christine Peterson, a member of the free software movement back then. At the time, many people in the software industry were already talking about free software -- or freeware. Yet in English, the word 'free' presents an ambiguity: does it refer to cost or liberties? Is it free, as in "free of charge", or free, as in "free will"? In fact, Open Source means neither. At least, it doesn't necessarily imply one or the other. 'Open Source' is a direct reference to how the source material is accessible in the open. Yet, it doesn't specify usage conditions, like whether the software can be used free of charge.

Indeed, while most open-source software is free to use, some require a paid license for commercial applications. Others may ask for royalties from the revenue generated by any commercial usage. The latter case is seen, for example, in game engines -- software platforms used to create video games. Game engines such as _Unity_ or _Unreal Engine_ will charge their most successful users a royalty from the game they have published and built using their platform. In exchange, they grant full access to the entire source code of the engine. As we'll see shortly, this gives game engines an immense innovation advantage as they benefit from the work of video game companies, sometimes improving the engine for them in response to specific needs.

Nevertheless, when it was being theorized, the exact sense of Open Source did not make unanimity. Movements such as the Free Open Source Software movement (FOSS) initiated by Richard Stallman remained attached to the word 'free' in the sense of liberty. The FOSS movement believes that once acquired -- free of charge or not -- users should be free to run, copy, distribute, study, change and improve software. FOSS articulates its definition of "free software" around _four essential freedoms_:

> - The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose;
> - The freedom to study how the program works and change it so it does your computing as you wish;
> - The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help others;
> - The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to others.
>
>
> <p align="right">Source: <a href="https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html#four-freedoms">GNU - What is Free Software</a></p>

The FOSS movement is thus a more radical branch of what we call Open Source today. Open Source at large is more nuanced on the matter. Permissions are granted according to the terms of an open-source license.

## Open-source licenses

Every open-source software is licensed under the terms of an open-source license. A license serves multiple purposes. First, it protects the authors and contributors of open-source software by typically limiting the liabilities and warranties coming with the software. Open-source code is often provided "as-is", and it is highly recommended to inspect any code included as part of a larger work. Second, it protects the users of open-source software by granting them explicit permissions and rights without legal repercussions.

Hence, a license usually specifies elements around three core axes:

- **Permissions** are rights granted to the user by the license. This typically covers commercial usage, distribution, modification, patenting and private use;
- **Conditions** specify under which terms are the aforementioned permissions granted;
- **Limitations** cover liabilities, warranties and trademark uses.

Besides, licenses usually fall into two categories: copyleft and permissive.

Copyleft licenses ensure that the license is preserved through modified work. They ensure that new work remains open-source under the same conditions as the original work. Said differently, it isn't possible to add restrictions when redistributing the software. Yet, copyleft is also a spectrum. Strong copyleft licenses like `GNU GPLv3` enforce that any modification or larger work is distributed in an open-source fashion and using the `GNU GPLv3` license. In this context, larger work means any new software built using an open-source component. It could designate another library or a commercial application that relies on open-source components. Slightly more flexible is `GNU LGPLv3`, which only enforces a copyleft on libraries. Any other larger work made using `GNU LGPLv3` may be distributed under different terms and conditions. Yet, new software libraries -- that is, reusable chunks of codes -- must be made public and licensed under `GNU LGPLv3`. Finally, the Mozilla Public License 2.0 -- or `MPL-2.0` in short, is a weak copyleft license. It enforces that any modification to an existing open-source file must be released publicly and licensed as `MPL-2.0` or a stronger copyleft license such as `GNU LGPLv3` or `GNU GPLv3`. It thus protects the original source code and ensures that what was created in an open-source fashion remains open-source. Yet, it is far more flexible regarding larger work constructed from it, libraries or not.

Permissive licenses, conversely, do not enforce any condition regarding modifying the code and its distribution as part of larger work. They differ, however, in the permissions they provide and in the conditions they require. Hence, the `Apache 2.0` license demands that any modification to a licensed code is thoroughly documented. `MIT` doesn't have such a requirement. Interestingly, the `MIT` license is also one of the rare licenses not to grant patent rights to users. This means that software or libraries licensed as `MIT` may end up in a larger work protected by a patent. All the other licensing schemes we've seen prevent that. For example, any derivative work using software under `Apache 2.0` cannot be patented. More specifically, the license grants explicit patent rights to all its users, thus preventing anyone from patenting something others use. The `GNU GPLv3` license goes as far as stating the following:

> Every program is threatened constantly by software patents. States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could make it effectively proprietary.
>
> <p align="right"><strong>GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 3, 29 June 2007</strong></p>

Regardless of their nature, copyleft or permissive, every open-source license will require that any code licensed by them is distributed with a proper license notice explicitly stating under what license they are distributed. Some, such as `GNU GPLv3`, `GNU LGPLv3` and `MPL-2.0`, even enforce that the source code is available when the software is distributed. Interestingly, this is not the case with `Apache 2.0` and `MIT` which do not necessarily require the source code to be public when distributing software.

To make it more digestible, we've summarized this information in the following table. You can find an interactive version of that table on [choosealicense.com][choosealicense].

| License                    | Permissions                                                                                   | Conditions                                                                                     | Limitations                                |
| ---                        | ---                                                                                           | ---                                                                                            | ---                                        |
| GNU GPLv3                  | ✓ Commercial use <br/>✓ Distribution<br/>✓ Modification<br/>✓ Patent rights<br/>✓ Private use | ✓ Disclose source <br/>✓ Include notice<br/>✓ Same license<br/>✓ Mandatory changelog           | x Liability<br/>x Warranty                 |
| GNU LGPLv3                 | ✓ Commercial use <br/>✓ Distribution<br/>✓ Modification<br/>✓ Patent rights<br/>✓ Private use | ✓ Disclose source <br/>✓ Include notice<br/>✓ Same license (library)<br/>✓ Mandatory changelog | x Liability<br/>x Warranty                 |
| Mozilla Public License 2.0 | ✓ Commercial use <br/>✓ Distribution<br/>✓ Modification<br/>✓ Patent rights<br/>✓ Private use | ✓ Disclose source <br/>✓ Include notice<br/>✓ Same license (file)<br/>                         | x Liability<br/>x Warranty<br/>x Trademark |
| Apache 2.0                 | ✓ Commercial use <br/>✓ Distribution<br/>✓ Modification<br/>✓ Patent rights<br/>✓ Private use | ✓ Include notice<br/>✓ Mandatory changelog                                                     | x Liability<br/>x Warranty<br/>x Trademark |
| MIT                        | ✓ Commercial use <br/>✓ Distribution<br/>✓ Modification<br/>✓ Private use                     | ✓ Include notice                                                                               | x Liability<br/>x Warranty                 |

# Why Open Source

So far, we've primarily described what Open Source is and where it came from. Yet, why did this movement appear to begin with? We have touched on that, and the story of the FOSS movement might have also given some additional clues. We could summarize the motivations behind Open Source in a simple statement: building software is a complicated endeavour, so it's better done together. In many aspects, Open Source is an attempt at building better, more robust software faster. It emphasizes sharing and collaboration, which thus encourages improvements and iterations of existing software from various sources.
In contrast, proprietary software is often only ever driven by one company's priorities. Sometimes, it is even simpler for companies to provide extra support to users than to fix or rework an existing software piece. Let's see clearer and delve into the value and benefits of having an open-source strategy.

## Open Source as a development methodology

Open Source is, first and foremost, a development methodology. It is an approach which favours frequent releases and short iteration cycles. It is inherently agile, as users drive requirements and roadmap unpredictably. There isn't two identical open-source project. Some projects may be dormant until a particular life event makes it suddenly popular, drawing attention from many developers simultaneously. Some others may sustain a constant activity and steady development. Yet, what's common to all is how maintainers must constantly adapt to their users. Some will report bugs or request assistance, some will ask for specific features, and some may even propose changes or implement new features.

As a result, through well-defined processes, constant efforts from open-source maintainers and sometimes a bit of magic, projects evolve organically in a very agile manner into something useful to many. For this to happen, open-source projects must have clear contribution guidelines and accessible instructions for building, developing and testing the project. And because a project is only instrumental if it has users, successful open-source projects are also those which make it easy for their users. This means providing good interface references, tutorials, user manuals, installation instructions and other various kinds of documentation that are relevant to the project. Some projects even go to the extent of documenting their design decisions through approaches such as [Architectural Decision Records][ADR] to make the work of future maintainers -- which may as well be themselves -- simpler.

For many organizations, adopting an open-source strategy is a means to enforce those practices. Who would not want a project -- even internal -- to be well-documented and accessible? By following an open-source approach, organizations reduce the risk of a project becoming hard to maintain. They enforce an excellent separation between software components and ensure that software quality converges towards excellence. With many users and contributors chiming in, software only becomes more robust. Indeed, people may run into unidentified software defects or inaccurate documentation pieces. So, the more eyes, the merrier.

## Open Source for transparency

Another critical factor leading to the choice of an open-source strategy is the need for transparency. This may sound obvious, but it is a strong enough argument for many organizations. The reasons behind it may be plurals: regulation, trust, security, etc. Making a project Open Source is a way to share accountability with a broader audience. It is a double-edged sword as people may find critical defects that might have escaped the maintainers' scrutiny.
Yet, on the other hand, defects are found -- and hopefully fixed. Open Sourcing a project often comes as a token of goodwill proving a specific product or algorithm conforms to its pitch. By giving access to the source code, interested parties can dissect and deeply audit a project, thus unveiling or nuancing any invalid claim.

## Open Source for Innovation

As an immediate consequence, Open Source has proven to be crucial for fostering innovation in the software industry at large. Similarly to how many scientists campaign for public access to science literature, open-source advocates underline the importance of sharing source material to drive the development of software further. Even for industry leaders, Open-sourcing software means stimulating competition and encouraging better approaches, which may directly benefit their primary business activities. Some of the aspects we've seen earlier about open-source licensing relate directly to this.

The software industry is full of examples of large companies working on and improving open-source materials. [Linux][] is notably the most successful open-source project to date. It has led to countless derivative works known as _Linux distributions_ with some prevalent ones such as [Ubuntu][]. Linux's development has not only led to a robust operating system toolkit. Still, it is also responsible for countless useful tools commonly used by all software engineers. A well-known success story in the development of _Linux_ includes _Git_, a distributed version control system which has become the de-facto version control system for many open-source and proprietary software alike. Besides, prominent actors in the software industry are also known for their open-source contributions. Google, for example, released Android in 2008 as the first major open-source mobile operating system derived from Linux. Today, [Android][] powers more than 70% of the mobile phones across the entire world. Continuing with Microsoft, which has given birth to [TypeScript][], a widely used programming language on the Web, as well as [Visual Studio Code][VSCode]: the most used integrated development environment (IDE) by a large margin with countless plugins, integrations and packages developed by a large community of enthusiasts. As a last example,
Those are very concrete examples of innovations rooted in Open Source.

## Open Source as a governance model

The choice of Open Source for such large innovative projects makes even more sense when seeing it through the lens of ownership and governance. Large projects such as protocols, operating systems or programming languages have a much better chance of success when built in the open with an open governance model. Hence, the idea of inclusive meritocracy often drives Open Source projects. Said differently, contributions are welcomed from anywhere, with the best ideas being adopted.

And how to determine the best ideas? Simply, they are the ones that work, and that end up gathering support from a community.

It is expected to see projects splitting around some core design decisions. This is typically called a fork. Contributors and users will then follow one path or the other. Over time, this can lead to various outcomes:

- a merge of the fork back into the original project once an agreement is found;
- an abandonment of the original project, superseded by the fork;
- an abandon of the fork which didn't get any traction;
- two separate ecosystems solving similar problems with different trade-offs.

Mind you, a fork is often perceived as an ultimate course of action. There are many steps usually happening between. People often engage in public forums about design decisions or new ideas to gather sentiment towards specific evolutions. Projects do not necessarily seek consensus, and the majority isn't always the winning side. Between an idea supported by the majority but not implemented and a less popular idea immediately available, there's a strong chance for the latter to be adopted.

All-in-all, every project is different, and they must pick a governance model which works for them. Those who fully embrace Open Source will document their decision-making process, and those who agree with the premises of that process will then form a community. Those who disagree are free to fork the project and continue on a different path. Only time can tell what ensues.

## Open Source for longevity

This resilience to time is, in fact, another core reason encouraging organizations to adopt an open-source strategy. It is hard to predict the business requirements of tomorrow. Harder even is to predict what people will want and do in the future. Building projects in the open through collective intelligence increases their chances of lasting longer. When a project is built collectively, everything about the project, including its processes, its roadmap and its user documentation, is meant to allow anyone to understand and pick up the project where it's at. When maintainers are no longer motivated or become unavailable, it remains possible to find new maintainers relatively -- provided that the project is following an open-source approach. This is much harder to achieve on internal projects, which require specific training and often rely on unspoken and unwritten knowledge.

In addition, even abandoned open-source projects remain helpful for posterity. Like relics of the past, they are full of teaching. They can be studied by future code archaeologists trying to understand how something got there. A failed attempt at building a novel database solution may be an inspiration for the database engine of tomorrow. When projects are kept private, knowledge and effort disappear into oblivion. Many organizations choose to open source projects as they retire them when they no longer present a competitive advantage. While this doesn't bear the benefits that we underlined in the previous sections, it is still a valuable form of contribution to the grand scheme of building software.

## Open Source as marketing

Finally, marketing itself can be a driving factor of an open-source strategy. In the same way that a furnished portfolio increases your chance of getting a job, open-source projects can showcase organizations from a technical standpoint. Hence, Open Source also exists as a means to attract talent. Significant open-source contributions stand out. Not only does it demonstrate an organization's ability to work in a collaborative and transparent manner, but it can also convey ideas of software quality and working standards better than any discourse.

Some companies have become known through some of their open-source projects, fast-tracking them as leaders and pioneers of the software industry. This is the case, for example, of Netflix, which is widely known for its ["Chaos Monkey"][Chaos Monkey], a resiliency tool meant to harden large infrastructure by randomly turning off live components of a production environment. This exposes organizations and their engineering departments to failures more frequently than usual, ensuring that they can promptly recover from failures -- should they be induced or from natural causes. Besides being a fascinating piece of engineering, this story makes for a great marketing pitch. It has indeed piqued the curiosity of many software engineers around the world.

# Contributing to Open Source

Many people hear about Open Source and think: "This sounds great, I would like to contribute!". Yet, the task may rapidly feel overwhelming. Large open-source projects can span over millions of lines of code, thousands of modules and hundreds of active contributors. How does one make sense of that? And what does it even mean to 'contribute' after all? What if you're not a software engineer? Can you still contribute to a project? Let's build an intuition for these questions. To do that, we will review some types of possible contributions.

## Types of contributions

### Code

The most apparent type of contribution which comes to mind is code. This is, of course, unsurprising given that consumers of Open Source software are usually software developers themselves. Often enough, a solution may only partially fit someone's need, and they may need one or two extra features which they are keen on developing themselves. It's also frequent for people to identify defects and issue a fix to upstream maintainers. Underneath it all, it's a win-win situation. Someone made a chunk of work available for free, saving someone else time and money. Contributing back to making the solution better is a nice gesture.
Moreover, it removes the burden of having to maintain a fork. Indeed, as the original software evolves, users may be keen on keeping up with its various updates. So, any change made to that software is better included in the original version so that new changes are made without the risk of conflicting with the change.

Incidentally, code contributions aren't necessarily what maintainers are looking for at first, especially in the early phases of a project. It is actually rather complicated to reconcile code written by many developers. This is generally possible only when software has reached sufficient maturity and after architectural patterns and habits have emerged. New software is usually more fragile, and maintainers tend to be careful about including additions that may not account for the bigger picture. So, while it may sound the most obvious, it is best to always look for what maintainers are looking for first. We will come back to this shortly.

Nevertheless, code contributions can also happen without explicitly writing code. Code reviews, for example, are essential to reduce defects and improve the overall code quality. Sparing an eye to helping peer review the work of others can be genuinely beneficial to a project and is often an excellent way to get started with code changes. Before doing any substantial work, watching how others do it, their habits, their conventions, etc., turns out to be beneficial.

### Ideas

Equally important yet often dismissed are contributions in the form of ideas. Open-source projects will typically discuss designs, issues and project evolutions in public. This is an opportunity for users and contributors to share feedback. Building software without users is complicated. So, as a project maintainer, direct feedback from users is immensely valuable, especially when the room is made for it. Platforms such as GitHub provide discussion threads, polls, Q&A and so forth to facilitate conversations. Many projects also set up more synchronous communication channels such as Discord or Telegram. It may sometimes not look like it, but hanging around on a Discord server and participating in discussions is a form of contribution.

### Documentation

When conversations lead to actionable items for a project, they become documentation. Yet, often, it is a very rough form of documentation. Part of the tasks revolving around software development consists of capturing those conversations as intelligible documents. Projects thus generally divide documentation along four dimensions:

- Tutorials: meant to teach basics and provide a learning experience;
- How-to guides: provide concrete steps to solve a particular problem;
- Explanations: general theoretical knowledge to help deepen comprehension;
- References: practical information to come back to for detail.

Writing good documentation is hard. Even harder is to keep documentation up-to-date as context evolves and parts move. While many software components can be automatically checked through tools and compiler rules, documentation often depends on human interventions. Users are typically the first ones exposed to documentation and, thereby, the ones stumbling upon quirks and mistakes. Fixing mistakes as they're found is an easy way to contribute to a project and something maintainers are almost always looking for. Feedback on documentation is also generally welcomed. Users are the primary audience for software documentation; it is written for them. It is thus only normal that they help tailor it to their comprehension.

### Design

Do you know what's better than good documentation? Beautiful, good documentation! Design work, in general, is well appreciated in Open Source and will be our 4th key contribution area. Besides, when software has a user interface, icons, typography, backgrounds, and layouts become an integral part of its development. Yet, graphical design is a totally different job than software development. And it is rare to find individuals with both skills. So help is often appreciated.

Some open-source projects even entirely focus on design. This is the case, for example, of [FontAwesome][] and [Feather][]. They offer a bank of well-crafted icons ready for any project to supercharge their user interface with beautiful icons instantly. Google's [Material Design][] is another successful example of an entire open-source design system. Over the years, it has spearheaded countless conversations and studies on user experience and how to build proper user interfaces.

Projects like Google's Material that become truly popular may even become a brand. Think, for example, about [React][], a prevalent frontend framework for building user interfaces. It has become so popular that it's not rare to see job ads looking for "React Developers". [Wordpress][] is another major brand that is even an industry of its own nowadays that needs no introduction. In situations like these, design can be all over the place. A good, attractive website with illustrative diagrams or helpful animations makes for a valuable experience. A logo with a strong identity inspires confidence and attracts users and businesses. Beyond just "looking cool", it's also a sign that a project exists independently -- or, at the very least, that it aspires to it.

### Marketing

This naturally leads us to the next contribution sector: marketing. In many aspects, open-source projects are products. They have customers, stakeholders, roadmaps, identity and many traits that make them akin to products. Even though they are a special breed of products whose entrails can be dissected, they, like products, seek adoption. Oftentimes, projects start from simple ideas. They make someone's life easier. They are made public in case others would benefit from a similar solution. Yet, as they become popular, they demand more work and effort to maintain and building businesses around them is common.

As a consequence, the need to attract new users grows as well. In this context, marketing can take various forms, from 'spreading the word' to organizing live events focused around a particular project. Articles, newsletters and testimonies can generate incredible momentum for projects—especially success stories. Projects often struggle to get their first critical users as many organizations still see open-source at large as a lower quality sandbox than so-called "enterprise software". Hence, it's common to see organizations standing in the back, waiting for someone else to take the first leap of faith and use open-source software in production before it's even famous. Adoption is much easier after a few success stories.

This is an important aspect that is easily undermined. Many brilliant open-source projects die off, too, because no one gets to see them. Luck is an implied factor in the success of a project. Still, efficient marketing can help provoke luck once in a while. Maintainers are often too busy building software and improving their tools. Yet, it's good to remind oneself that the very purpose of software is to be used.

### Financial

So far, we've seen various contribution areas for various skill sets. Yet, what about situations where you are interested in contributing to a project but do not have the skillset or the time it demands to make valuable contributions? Or what if there's no need for your particular skill set because the project is at a phase where it doesn't need that particular skill set? Depending on what the project aspires to, financial support can also be a practical form of contribution. It is pretty common to see sponsoring programs near open-source projects. Various platforms exist, for that matter, such as [Github Sponsors][] or [Open Collective][].

Some projects are also part of larger groups, such as foundations, which usually have membership programs and various ways of accepting financial contributions. Sometimes, it's easier to let projects decide for themselves where they need to pull resources. Often, project maintainers only work part-time or are just plain benevolent, for they cannot sustain themselves financially through a project. Platforms like [Buy Me A Coffee][] also encourage people to support projects through small donations. This is a nice gesture which can have positive impacts on maintainers. A coffee and a small appreciation note can change someone's day radically, particularly when they prevent countless work hours and trouble ahead of you.

### Support

Finally, we will conclude this tour of contributions with an aspect that is also too often overlooked: technical support. Paradoxically, this is where Open Source shines almost at its best. It is what makes Open Source such an attractive model to begin with. Open Source is, before all, a community-oriented approach. Building a community is a challenging task, yet a strong community that looks for each other is precious. In the closed-source world, users usually expect technical support from the organization selling the software. And there's only so much that a single entity can do.

In Open Source, the entire world is the technical support desk. All the other users and contributors who have gone through the same issues can help. In general, support tickets are even publicly available or simply happen on public forums such as Discord or StackExchange. Since everything there's to know about a project is publicly available, any enthusiast may build a deep understanding of a project. Coupled with past experiences, this means users are very capable of helping each other without any help from core project maintainers. When communities reach levels where they can support each other, nothing can stop them. During the early phases of a project, it is often up to the maintainers to help and guide people through. Yet, as the project and community matures, their role steadily shifts towards providing the community with better resources to help themselves.


## How to contribute

### Contributing guidelines

### Discussing with maintainers

### Vulnerabilities & responsible disclosures

# Building Open Source businesses

## Governance Models

Strong open-source projects are those that manage to build an efficient governance. Of course, since every project is different and comprises various people, finding an ideal governance model is a challenging task. Akin to companies, projects often start small and grow organically into a structure that fits them. Yet, we can broadly categorize commonly seen models as one of 5 categories: founder-leader, do-ocracy, self-appointed steering committee, elected committee and single-vendor. Let's quickly see what each entails.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Perhaps describe a bit the mission/role of a governance model in open-source projects.

### Founder-leader

The founder-leader model is the most common type of governance model -- per number of projects -- found in Open Source. This is a simple model and the most intuitive approach for many projects where those who originated the project decide on its evolutions. Founders impulse the vision and administer the project. This works well for projects with few contributors, where founders have enough capacity to deal with all requests and decisions. This model shows its limits as soon as projects grow beyond what the founders can manage. Yet it's not uncommon to see successful and large projects, like the Python programming language, still rely on this approach as an ultimate authority. Projects are split into smaller areas where decisions are made relatively independently as they grow. The vision and final decisions on strategic decisions often remain under the founders' responsibility.

### Do-ocracy

In Open Source, accessibility to the raw material and contributions from the community are an integral part of a project's life. So naturally, many projects embrace do-ocracy as a governance model. In other words, decisions are made by those who do the work. In this approach, projects settle on a few metrics they recognize as good to measure contributions and naturally listen to those who have contributed the most. Earning a seat at the governance table means actively contributing to the source material. This approach is particularly well suited for projects demanding a high expertise in a specific domain. Those who prove capable of doing so are also trusted for their judgement and ability to assess problems correctly. Interestingly, this model is often perceived as _an absence of governance_ since there's no one designated authority but rather a context made of many interactions between people who recognize authority in the makers. Nevertheless, this remains a governance model of its own.

### Self-appointed council

Some projects prefer to keep a separation between those who make and those who decide. Hence, technical councils, steering committees or boards of directors constitute a third type of governance model. Broadly speaking, self-appointed councils refer to projects where members designate a group as the acting authority on the project. A self-appointed committee typically forms out of a general agreement when it is needed and decides its own succession rules. Generally, communities resort to self-appointed councils to resolve conflictual situations between their members. Councils act as a mediation body representing the interests of the project. The risk here is for a committee to turn into an ivory tower where governance seems out of reach from new contributors unless chosen by that greater authority. Hence, self-appointed councils work best when they have a specific mission to tackle for a fixed period.

### Elected steering committee

As a natural evolution, self-appointed councils often turn into elected steering committees. In this approach, projects decide on a voting procedure and rules for election ratification. Elected members typically come from the project community and want to represent another part of the community. They may also be members who want to get involved in the project's decisions and who are appreciated for their leadership. Projects that follow this type of governance tend to be quite mature, with a well-documented process.

### Single-vendor

Finally, projects exist where a single organization or vendor handles the governance. This is essentially the case for business entities who decide to open access to some of their projects. Open source projects under this type of governance are mainly maintained by a single vendor who wholly owns the roadmap and the contributions allowed within the project. This model works well for projects that adopt an open-source strategy for reasons other than community governance; for example, as a way to be more transparent or as a way to attract talent. Yet, they do not generally seek external contributions unless immediately aligned with their own strategy.



## Revenue models

### Freemium / Paid-licenses

### Royalties

### Crowfunding & sponsorship

### Open Source as a service

## Measuring progress

### Contributors

### Usage

### Community

# Limits of Open Source

## Solving the right problem

## Sustaining projects

## Surviving against other projects

## Barriers to adoption ?

# References

## Articles

- https://opensource.com/resources/what-open-source
- https://opensource.com/open-source-way
- https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html
- https://choosealicense.com/licenses/
- https://choosealicense.com/appendix/
- https://adr.github.io/
- https://documentation.divio.com/

## Videos

- [The Economics of Programming Languages](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XZ3w_jec1v8)
- [The Hard Parts of Open Source](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_4EX4dPppA)

[ADR]: https://adr.github.io/
[Android]: https://www.android.com/
[Buy Me A Coffee]: https://www.buymeacoffee.com/
[Chaos Monkey]: https://github.com/Netflix/chaosmonkey
[choosealicense]: https://choosealicense.com/licenses/
[Feather]: https://feathericons.com/
[FontAwesome]: https://fontawesome.com/
[Github Sponsors]: https://github.com/sponsors/
[Linux]: https://www.linux.org/
[Material Design]: https://m3.material.io/
[Open Collective]: https://opencollective.com/
[React]: https://react.dev/
[TypeScript]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/
[Ubuntu]: https://ubuntu.com/
[VSCode]: https://code.visualstudio.com/
[Wordpress]: https://wordpress.com/
