Blockchain technology is the foundation stone for Web3, but what is Web3? To understand the future, lets recap the past first. Web 1.0 refers to the internet's early days in the 1990s, characterised by static, text-based websites where the primary activity users did was to ‘read’. It was a little like an encyclopaedia, users could search and study topics but there was little stimulation or interactivity. 

Web 2.0 arrived in 1999, coined by Darcy DiNucci to distinguish it from web 1.0. Web 2.0 saw the introduction of interactive websites like YouTube and Facebook. If Web 1.0 was the ‘read’ era, Web 2.0 allowed users to ‘read’ and ‘write’. The ‘big tech’ companies subsidised the huge storage expenses so users could upload content and ‘social media’ was born. User generated content would garner reactions and ‘sentiment’ based algorithms would become ever more sophisticated thereafter. 

It was Gavin Wood, co-founder of Ethereum, who introduced the term Web3 to describe the next iteration of the internet which would revolve around blockchain. While it has become somewhat of a buzzword bandied about, you can think of it as a decentralized network where the users now ‘read’, ‘write’ and ‘own’ their content, currency and digital assets. Blockchain is often said to ‘kill the middleman’, and in this case, the ‘big tech’ companies are the middlemen whose stranglehold on user data is removed.

Here is an example that might resonate with you right now depending on what browser you are using. Most people unwittingly disclose a lot of data just by surfing the web. Brave is a browser, based on Google Chromium, that protects user privacy by leveraging blockchain technology. It flips the traditional advertising model by compensating for ads in its ERC-20 token, BAT, or Basic Attention Token.

Another Web3 term is ‘the semantic web’ where computers can comprehend and use information just as humans do. With the relentless advancement of AI continuing at a dizzying pace, blockchain may be adopted out of necessity to insure the integrity of digital content against deep fakes. The biggest use case for blockchain in future may be its ability to verify and authenticate digital content. For example, a video’s unique hash could be recorded on-chain. Before a video is played, its authenticity can be verified by cross checking its hash against the hash on the blockchain.

Some of the less glamorous use cases of blockchain are infrastructure solutions that offer an alternative to the major cloud providers. For example, IPFS (Interplanetary File System) is like a file system for the blockchain world. This provides users with a place to store and retrieve large data sets with all benefits of blockchain, ie. decentralisation, data integrity, etc. There are also decentralised compute offerings.
