DeFi, or decentralized finance, is arguably the number one use case for blockchain to date. While TradFi has barriers to entry and can discriminate against those in the developing world, DeFi is more inclusive dispensing with the requirements for KYC, registration and minimum account balances. DeFi creates an open, transparent, and decentralized alternative by removing the various intermediaries. DeFi allows users to have self-custody of their own assets and transact directly with anyone globally.

The term DeFi was coined in 2018 by ethereum developers who introduced smart contracts to the blockchain space, building on the 2009 breakthrough of Bitcoin as the first peer to peer digital currency. In addition, ERC token standards opened the door for the proliferation of NFTs and financial services like stablecoins, decentralized exchanges, lending and borrowing protocols and yield farming. Yield farming refers to depositing tokens into a liquidity pool to earn rewards, paid out in a native currency or sometimes the protocol’s own token. Think of it as providing liquidity in return for favourable interest rates. 

The DeFi space has grown steadily since with other blockchains adding to the total value locked (TVL) on sites like DefiLama which track such metrics. As you would expect in an unregulated industry, there are plenty of scams, so DYOR, ‘do your own research’.

Some users, especially newcomers, tend to leave their funds on centralized exchanges (CEXs) just out of convenience, however, it is generally safer to self-custody as you have total control and access to your funds. DeFi happens mostly on decentralized exchanges (DEXs) where trading takes place via self executing smart contracts and peer to peer transactions. There are no intermediaries, ada and digital assets transfer back and forth between users’ wallets. DEXs on Cardano make use of the determinism (reliability) afforded by the eUTxO model. 

A stablecoin is a fixed-price cryptocurrency which is pegged, or backed by another stable asset. Stablecoins enable instant payment and settlement of transactions but most importantly, they offer a safe haven from volatility. Stablecoins represent a stable asset regardless of how other assets fluctuate, or if a country suffers from high inflation and an unstable national currency. It’s generally accepted that stablecoins are essential for a blockchain’s DeFi ecosystem to flourish. We delve into the different kinds of stablecoins in future courses. 
