While trillions of US dollars were printed in 2020 alone, many cryptocurrencies, such as bitcoin and ada, have a hard cap on their supply which creates scarcity. This scarcity can be extended to tokens and other digital assets in gaming and the metaverse. The metaverse is a 3D virtual world, built on augmented and virtual reality, and is popular for online role-playing games. McKinsey & Company predict the metaverse economy to reach $5 trillion by 2030.

Markets and economies form around the creation and trading of tokens and digital assets. For example, gamers can be rewarded in-game assets for clearing stages of a game. These in-game assets can be tokens, collectibles, virtual land, NFTs, art, avatars, etc…with various levels of digital scarcity. 

New terms have entered the lexicon like ‘GameFi’, .ie. Game Finance. Many games have become wildly popular offering ‘play to earn’ models for players. They can earn various digital assets by reaching milestones, beating other real world players, or AI-generated opponents. Often these in-game assets can also be traded on real world exchanges. 

This is a break from traditional ‘pay to play’ games which often require a subscription. This is the familiar theme throughout the old Web 2.0 gaming world where the gamer is just paying for a licence that can be taken away by a game studio. There are no incentives around earning, collecting or trading various digital assets. Blockchain offers gamers the opportunity for true ownership. Web2 games can currently handle more transactions and active players online than a web3 game, but as blockchain scaling solutions mature the gap is closing. 
