As we mentioned, using the formula for the next epoch to calculate, for example, the treasury value, will sometimes not yield accurate results. This dynamic can arise when transferring funds to pay a Project Catalyst proposal or, for instance, when using a MIR certificate to compensate for pool rewards missed due to a bug. MIR stands for "move instantaneous rewards". While transparently recorded on the Cardano blockchain via the MIR certificate mechanism, such edge cases are not always documented in detail publicly, leading to a lack of historical background. This significantly compromises transparency, which in turn results in uncertainty and diminished trust.   

Establishing suitable documentation can prevent this, enabling future reviews and audits as well as improvements to the documentation. This, in turn, strengthens the credibility and operational resilience of Cardano. 

The Foundation started with the formula implementation and edge case documentation, but it still needs to address some remaining unknowns. For instance, it is necessary to account for the early Catalyst funds or MIR certificates before epoch 271, as they have no metadata attached to them. Through open sourcing this formula, the Foundation hopes to collaborate with community members to establish a data source-independent solution. Currently, we have a Koios data provider and a data provider for static JSON files, which serve aggregated data. Additionally, a scoped indexer, potentially based on Yaci-Store, a Java-based Cardano datastore implementation, would help ensure maximum transparency in the reward calculation.  

This initiative also ultimately concerns the treasury value, which is intended to fund the decentralized development of the ecosystem, pool rewards, and transaction fees. Consequently, it directly impacts aspects that every Cardano user should care about, including the rewards deployment in the ecosystem they are a part of. At the same time, all contributors, whether sharing code or information, play an important role in bringing more trust and transparency to the ecosystem, and thereby improving conditions for increased blockchain adoption.  
