# Open Source vs Free Software

While the sharing of source code started in the very early days of the Internet, the term open source was coined around 1998 by Christine Peterson, a member of the Free Open Source Software movement (FOSS). At the time, many people in the software industry were already talking about free software – or freeware. Yet in English, the word 'free' presents an ambiguity: does it refer to cost or liberties? Is it free, as in "free of charge" or as in "free will"? In fact, open source means neither. At least, it doesn't necessarily imply one or the other. 'Open source' is a direct reference to how the source material is accessible in the open. Yet, it doesn't specify usage conditions, like whether the software can be used free of charge.

Indeed, while most open-source software is free to use, some require a paid license for commercial applications. Others may ask for royalties from the revenue generated by any commercial usage.

For example, the latter case is seen in game-engines – software platforms used to create video games. 

Unreal Engine will charge their most successful users a royalty from the game they have published and built using their platform.

Unity, in a similar fashion, offers a subscription model with different price tiers based on the games' success. In exchange, they grant full access to the entire engine's source code. This gives game engines an immense innovation advantage as they benefit from the work of video game companies, sometimes improving the engine for them in response to specific needs.

Nevertheless, when it was being theorised, the exact sense of open source was not universally agreed upon. Movements such as the Free Open Source Software movement (FOSS) initiated by Richard Stallman remained attached to the word 'free' in the sense of liberty. The FOSS movement believes that once acquired – free of charge or not – users should be free to run, copy, distribute, study, change and improve software.

FOSS articulates its definition of "free software" around four essential freedoms:
- The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose
- The freedom to study how the program works and change it so it does your computing as you wish
- The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help others
- The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to others. *Source: GNU - What is Free Software*

The FOSS movement is thus a more radical branch of what we call open source today. Open source at large is more nuanced on the matter. Permissions are granted according to the terms of an open-source license.

## Questions

1. Who coined the term "open source" around 1998?

A. Richard Stallman
**B. Christine Peterson**
C. Unreal Engine developers
D. Unity software creators

2. What does the term "open source" primarily refer to?

A. Software that is always free of charge
B. Software that is closed to public access
**C. Accessibility of the source material in the open**
D. Software that cannot be used commercially

3. How does Unreal Engine, as mentioned in the text, utilize an open-source model?

A. It is completely free for all users
B. It does not allow modifications to its engine
C. It restricts access to its source code
**D. It charges a royalty from successful games built using its platform**

4. What is a key belief of the Free Open Source Software (FOSS) movement?

A. Software should always be free of charge
B. Users should not be allowed to modify software
**C. Users should have the freedom to run, copy, distribute, study, change, and improve software**
D. Software should only be accessible through paid licenses
