**What is Bitcoin?**

In the previous unit  we  said Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency, it wasn’t the first attempt at digital money. In fact, it built on elements of previous efforts. Blockchain's origins and the birth of Bitcoin are summarised in this condensed timeline:
1991: Researchers Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stornetta introduced a method to securely "timestamp" digital documents, chaining them together cryptographically to prevent tampering. This technology, though innovative, didn't gain traction and the patent expired in 2004.

2004: Hal Finney, one of veterans of the original cypherpunk movement, built upon earlier ideas with "Reusable Proof of Work" (RPoW). This system tackles double-spending but relies on a central server for verification. RPoW serves as an important stepping stone for future cryptocurrencies.

2008: Amidst a global financial crisis, the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto released a revolutionary white paper: *Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System*. Inspired by an earlier project called *Hashcash*, Bitcoin introduces a decentralized solution for verifying transactions, eliminating the need for a central authority. This marked the true birth of blockchain technology. 

Many people will have heard of Bitcoin, without knowing what Blockchain is. The terms are often used interchangeably. To be clear, Blockchain is the technology, and Bitcoin is just one implementation of Blockchain. Bitcoin’s big breakthrough was that it solved what's known as the ‘double spend problem’ where a bad actor might spend a cryptocurrency twice before the recipient(s) is aware that  only one of the transactions was valid. The Bitcoin whitepaper proposes *“a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer distributed timestamp server to generate computational proof of the chronological order of transactions.”*

The Cypherpunk movement played a crucial role in shaping Bitcoin's early development and philosophy. Their values, technical expertise, and active participation laid the foundation for cryptocurrencies. Fiat money is issued and controlled by governments and central banks, with seamling endless supply. Most transactions are scrutinised and sometimes bank accounts are censored and even frozen. As most central banks are transitioning to completely digital systems, freedoms and privacy are at risk of being sacrificed. While good old-fashioned hard cash still allows for private and anonymous transacting, it is less and less accepted in everyday life, with many businesses now operating as ‘card only’.

Bitcoin is the antithesis to such regimes. It is decentralized, peer to peer, censorship resistant and not backed by any government or institution. Each Bitcoin transaction resides on a public ledger accessible by anyone with an internet connection. Bitcoin is a deflationary asset, with a limited fixed supply of 21 million, expected to be mined by 2140. This mitigates inflation to some degree, and ensures there is no uncertainty about its current and future supply. 

The creation of new bitcoins is determined by a protocol and a predefined set of rules. A process known as ‘mining’ verifies and validates blockchain transactions, as well as the creation of new bitcoin in return for a reward. Furthermore, Bitcoin was released as open source code, with anyone welcome to contribute and participate in its development. In contrast, traditional financial systems are typically written in proprietary code, privately controlled by authorities and central banks.

On the 3rd of January 2009, Satoshi Nakamoto mined the first bitcoin block, which had a reward of 50 bitcoins. Bitcoin's Genesis Block contained a message that Satoshi Nakamoto added:  "The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks."

Although the precise reason for including this text was never explained, many interpret it as a kind of unofficial mission statement for Bitcoin itself. The text is the headline of an article in the Jan. 3, 2009 edition of The [London] Times about the government's failure to stimulate the economy following the 2008 financial crisis. Many believe Satoshi Nakamoto's reference to this article was a subtle hint that Bitcoin should be the antidote to the contagion spread by the major investment banks that required government bailouts and set economies in a tailspin. 

The first recipient of Bitcoin was Hal Finney, who received 10 bitcoins from Satoshi Nakamoto in the first bitcoin transaction on 12 January 2009. Every 10 minutes since then, the bitcoin supply increases as miners are rewarded by the system for validating transactions. Every 4 years there is the famous "Bitcoin halving" which cuts the rewards in 2 and bitcoin's inflation goes down. So in 2009, rewards started at 50 BTC, halving subsequently to 25 BTC in 2012, 12.5 BTC in 2016, 6.25 BTC in 2020, and became 3.125 BTC on April 19th 2024. 

You may be asking yourself ‘does anyone use Bitcoin for anything? How is it useful?’ An increasing pool of investors view Bitcoin as ‘digital gold’, a viable alternative investment to diversify their portfolio, especially in times of market volatility. The fees and transaction times of Bitcoin are negligible compared to the traditional financial system, which sometimes take several business days for a money transfer. Bitcoin is especially appealing for international remittance, where some services can charge extortionate rates. Some notable transactions include the purchase of two pizzas on May 22 2010 for 10,000 Bitcoin ($40 equivalent at the time). May 22nd is celebrated each year as *Bitcoin pizza day*. On April 10, 2020 one bitcoin wallet belonging to the Bitfinex crypto-exchange moved 161,500 BTC (worth $1.1 billion at the time) for a fee of approximately $0.68. 

Bitcoin has its limitations. For example, transaction times can vary from ten minutes to up to one day during times of increased network traffic. Critics argue Bitcoin is not as decentralized as Satoshi once envisioned as the network is made up mostly of professional mining pools, who are the only ones who can afford to pay for the required hardware and accompanying electricity bills. Bitcoin has attracted criticism in the past, notably with some of its senior developers leaving the project citing concerns over centralization and lack of governance. Some feel a small core section of the bitcoin community wields too much power over the currency’s direction. While Bitcoin does have **programmability**, it has limited **expressiveness**. By design, Bitcoin is resistant to drastic change, mainly due to security reasons. This can also be viewed as a reluctance, or inability, to innovate. For some this is its great strength, for others it is its greatest weakness.

Bitcoin has received criticism over its high energy consumption. The more computation required, the more miners must spend on hardware to realistically compete for mining rewards. The barrier to entry rises, and participation becomes more exclusive.  Another drawback to consider is ever-increasing storage requirements. As the size of the blockchain grows, sync times and transaction settlement times increase. Fewer machines in the distributed system are able to participate, which may result in the network being less resilient to attacks and exploits.
