**Scalability case study: The Lightning Network**

The Lightning Network is a ‘Layer 2’ payment protocol that functions on top of a ‘Layer 1’ blockchain, in this case Bitcoin. Joseph Poon and Thaddeus Dryja published the Lightning Network white paper in February 2015. As Bitcoin can only process seven transactions per second today, the paper proposes a solution to this scalability challenge by executing transactions away from the main chain, or ‘off-chain’. The Lightning Network leverages user-generated bi-directional payment channels to enable almost instantaneous transactions with smaller transaction fees.  

**So how Does Lightning Network work?** A payment channel is created with an on-chain transaction, then the channel facilitates unlimited off-chain transactions without requiring consensus on-chain. This means transactions can be executed much faster for lower fees. When opening a payment channel, two parties set up a multi signature wallet and add some funds to it. You can think of it like a safe, where funds are traded back and forth but only accessible when both parties confirm their private keys. Each party signs and updates their records after each transaction. When they’ve finished doing business, the payment channel is closed and the latest updated balance is shared with the entire Bitcoin network. 

In case of disagreement, either party can revert to their updated records and recover their funds. You may be wondering how does a single payment channel between two parties solve Bitcoin’s scalability problem? This was just a simplification, as these single payment channels are the building blocks for a vast network. Even if Bob doesn’t have a direct payment channel with Alice, he can find an interconnected payment route via other channels. For example, if Alice wants to pay Bob, but doesn’t have a direct channel, she can leverage Fred’s channel who is a mutual friend. The smart contract will automatically find the shortest route, even if it must traverse several payment channels, otherwise it wouldn’t live up to its name as the Lightning Network!

The Lightning Network does have some drawbacks. For example, the receiving party needs to be online for a transaction to go through. Opening and closing a payment channel still requires an on-chain transaction. We’ll see later in the course how Cardano addresses some of these issues with a similar solution. 
