**What is Ethereum?**

Vitalik Buterin, a developer and one of the co-founders of *Bitcoin Magazine* wrote the Ethereum whitepaper in 2013. He made the case for a scripting language for Bitcoin, that would enable developers to design decentralized applications, or dApps, as they are commonly referred to. In what was an early test of governance, there was a failure to reach any agreement amongst the community. This led Buterin to begin development of a new blockchain called Ethereum that would bring programmability into the space. The whitepaper describes an open-source, public, permissionless, blockchain-based distributed computing platform that could run smart contracts. 

What are smart contracts? Originally the brainchild of lawyer and computer scientist, Nick Szabo in the 1990s, a smart contract is a self-executing program that runs on a blockchain once predetermined conditions are satisfied. Ethereum launched in 2015 and smart contracts soon gained broad adoption in the blockchain world.

The most common use of smart contracts is to execute a transaction only if certain conditions are met. Smart contracts are written in high-level programming language’s code and compiled into bytecode, which you can think of translating code into simpler code a computer can better understand. A decentralized Turing-complete virtual machine, the Ethereum virtual machine (EVM) then reads and runs these smart contracts using a global network of public nodes. This is where the term ‘world computer’ stems from, as an immutable, transparent blockchain running on a resilient network ensures censorship resistance.

Smart contracts on Ethereum are written using the Solidity programming language. It is built specifically for Ethereum and similar to Javascript offering a smooth learning curve for developers new to blockchain. On the downside, some experts believe Solidity is too expressive, whereby it is too easy for ‘unintended side effects’ to creep into a dApp’s code. One common bug, for example, is incorrect access control. This is where smart contracts do not have sufficient access controls in place for code that executes critical logic. Smart contracts enable a broad spectrum of use cases, which we’ll cover in later. For now, just know that developers could now create and publish dApps running on the Ethereum blockchain. 

Ether (ETH) is the cryptocurrency for Ethereum. When you execute a transaction you need to pay fees in ether, known as ‘gas’. The more computation required, the more you pay. Crucially, the same transaction can cost different amounts of gas at different times depending on network demand. Your transaction will be prioritized on how much gas you are willing to pay. We’ll see later how Cardano attempts to address these issues.

Ethereum also led the way in the rise of NFTs. An NFT, or non fungible token, is a type of cryptographic token that represents a unique asset. Think of them as tokenized certificates representing authenticity and ownership using a blockchain. Non fungible means tokens are not interchangeable, and this feature introduces ‘digital scarcity’, which opens up pandora's box of use cases we’ll cover later. Fungible tokens also have their place. Fiat currencies and most cryptocurrencies, like Bitcoin, ether and ada on Cardano are fungible. Fungible means assets are interchangeable, and practically indistinguishable from each other in everyday use as a medium of exchange.

If you want to create an NFT on Ethereum, you must abide by the ERC, or ‘Ethereum Request For Comment’, standards. ERC is basically a collection of guidelines for doing different things on its blockchain. While the ERC-20 standard allows users to create (or ‘mint’) indistinguishable tokens, the **ERC 721** standard catered for the issuance and trading of non fungible assets. This standard was subsequently enhanced again with ERC 1155 which enabled a single contract to contain both fungible and non fungible tokens, widening the scope again for new use cases. 

We’ll see later how Cardano innovated in the NFT space with the concept of Native Assets. 
