**Origins of Cardano**

There are three Cardano ‘genesis’ entities that have traditionally propped up Cardano. 

In 2015, Charles Hoskinson and Jeremy Wood co-founded **Input Output Global** (formerly Input Output Hong Kong). IOG is the development and science arm for Cardano. Since 2015, IOG has been focused on protocol development and academic research. It has more recently pivoted to a venture studio business model with spinoff companies focussed on Lace light wallet (lace.io), RealFi (realfi.io) and the Midnight partner chain among other critical infrastructure projects. Cardano went live in 2017. Built on a foundation of academic peer-reviewed research, it has maintained a 100% uptime since. 

The **Cardano Foundation (CF)**, based in Zug, Switzerland, was set up as the legal custodian for the Cardano brand and as a contributor to the governance of Cardano. The CF’s statutory purpose is to generally support the adoption and the advancement of Cardano as a public digital infrastructure. Its core activities revolve around providing utilities to the ecosystem, developing enterprise infrastructure tooling, strengthening operational resilience and regulatory clarity, and driving education through different initiatives. Part of these efforts is the facilitation of interactions with various stakeholders, including not only players from the immediate ecosystem but also international stakeholders such as standard setters, lawmakers or regulatory bodies.

**Emurgo**, with a focus on Asia and Africa, is the commercialization arm of Cardano. Emurgo concentrates on Education, Fintech infrastructure, developing the Yoroi wallet, ecosystem growth, smart contract audits and a social network called Cardano Spot. 

The ecosystem has grown and there are now dozens of companies and hundreds of projects < link the latest essential cardano weekly stats > building on Cardano. There are too many to mention here, but visit the ‘Showcase’ section of the Cardano Developer Portal for more details.

From the outset, Cardano’s mission was to improve upon previous generations, and build for the long term. While Ethereum favours ‘more heuristic arguments as it’s trying to do more faster’ as Vitalik Buterin explained, Cardano adopted a ‘first principles’ peer-reviewed **academic research** approach. This involves employing rigorous processes with formal methods, mathematical specs and proofs to deliver high-assurance software. Cardano is built on solid foundations, with over 200 research papers published and scrutinised at the top cryptography conferences.

One of Cardano’s key tenets is an open-source, patent-free philosophy where research papers, formal specifications and code repositories are available to all. Anyone with the appropriate technical skills can review the claims and findings from this academic approach. Other projects have borrowed heavily from IOG’s research in their protocol design. Unlike many projects which are mere forks of existing blockchains, much of Cardano is custom built using a ‘first principles’ approach.

Cardano identified key areas as essential for mass adoption:  

1) **Scalability**. While Bitcoin and Ethereum were landmark technical achievements, both have shortcomings. Bitcoin can handle just seven transactions per second, while Ethereum has had issues handling demand, where at a certain capacity, system bloat sets in, performance becomes unpredictable and transactions fees spike intermittently. The same transaction can incur different gas fees at times depending on network demand. Cardano seeks to address these shortcomings and mirror protocols like Bittorrent, where performance scales as new users join. 

2) **Interoperability**. Most mobile devices only function because of layers of interoperability standards. At a high level, the telecoms industry relies on the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) for mobiles to talk to each other across different networks and jurisdictions. The Wi-Fi standard ensures connectivity and faster speeds. TCP/IP is a suite of protocols that enables computers to communicate on the internet. Similarly, the future of blockchain is multi-chain and many dApps and tokens now operate cross-chain. Cardano has multiple solutions that are making their way from research papers to full implementation.

3) **Governance**, sometimes referred to as sustainability. Bitcoin and Ethereum have both encountered problems as they try to scale. They have no decision-making mechanisms to manage change. When a blockchain grows to millions of users, it’s not viable, or healthy, for a small ‘one pizza’ core team to be dictating outcomes. Worse still, it can lead to traumatic splits, for example, Bitcoin had the ‘Big blocks versus SegWit’ debate which eventually led to a hard fork resulting in two chains, Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin. Governance is not a sexy topic for many, but arguably essential if a blockchain is to last. How do we decide on an important parameter change? What happens when quantum computers arrive? How does a fledgling decentralized protocol decide on a roadmap? There are also funding considerations, money must come from somewhere for startups to breathe. There's also a tragedy of the commons scenario where users agree essential infrastructure, and critical updates, are required but there's no mechanisms to apply for, or approve, funding for development. 

Cardano is designed to enable the community to sustain its development by submitting and voting on funding proposals in Project Catalyst. To maintain long-term viability, the community controls the treasury system, which is regularly topped up from various sources. There is a clear plan in place to implement end-to-end on-chain governance.

