**Cardano Development Milestones**

Cardano is named after Gerolamo Cardano, an influential mathematician during the Renaissance. The Cardano roadmap is made up of five major eras, each named after prominent historical figures… Byron, Shelley, Goguen, Basho and Voltaire. The eras overlap in places and there are some interdependencies as we’ll see shortly. 

Byron was Cardano’s initial development phase named after the romantic poet Lord Byron. This era focused on bootstrapping the network, enabling users to transact in ada, Cardano’s native cryptocurrency. Ada is named after Lord Byron’s daughter,  Ada Lovelace, the 19th century mathematician and pioneering programmer. One Ada is equal to a million lovelaces. Cardano has a fixed supply of 45 billion ada. Every ada holder is incentivized to stake their ada which helps secure the network, and participate in governance. More on this later.

Ada holders used the *Daedalus* full node wallet during this era storing, sending and staking their ada on the incentivized testnet (ITN). The full node wallet was important during this bootstrapping bringing security and stability to the network. In the last few years, most people use Light wallets. A light wallet is smaller than a full node wallet and does not participate in block validation in the same way. The Light Wallet can query the blockchain but does not store the entire state of the chain. It is much faster as result, but relies on a third party to deliver (query) blockchain data.

Shelley, named after Percy Shelley, another prominent romantic poet, was the decentralization phase that introduced stake pools to increase Cardano's security and scalability. Users were now able to earn rewards for staking their ada to these pools. On March 31st of 2021, Cardano hit a milestone, as block production became fully decentralized. On that day, stake pool operators (SPOs) began producing 100% of new blocks. The ‘d’ (decentralization) parameter was subsequently retired, which made the network irreversibly decentralized. There are currently over 3,000 active pools that are supporting Cardano’s decentralization, with over 60% of ada staked, making it one of the most decentralized cryptocurrencies.

The Goguen era, named after the American computer scientist and academic, Joseph Goguen, introduced programmability with smart contract functionality. Developers could now create decentralized applications, or dApps as we’ll refer to them from here on. The Plutus Platform was introduced, which facilitates smart contracts written in Haskell to guarantee deterministic outputs. Goguen also saw improvements to the core Cardano offering most significantly the addition of a multi-asset ledger, which further enabled users to create (mint) new natively supported tokens. This allows for the creation of fungible and non-fungible tokens, supporting the creation of new digital assets on Cardano, as well as the tokenization of many types of physical assets.

The Basho era, which focuses on scalability, was named after Matsuo Basho, a famous Japanese poet. This era also focuses on improving the interoperability of the network. Basho is about boosting performance of the Cardano network to better support mass adoption as transaction volumes increase, and dApps require more resources.

Finally, the *Age of Voltaire* is the governance era, named after Voltaire, the renowned French philosopher. To date, Cardano has used Cardano Improvement Proposals as a vehicle to manage change, as well as Project Catalyst which serves an innovation fund through which ada holders can propose ideas, vote and receive funding. The Voltaire era brought voting and other governance mechanisms completely on-chain. More about this ambitious vision later. 

Although these eras appear sequentially on the roadmap, the development of some eras is taking place in parallel. For example, although we are currently in the *Age of Voltaire*, crucial scalability solutions like ‘input endorsers' will only be introduced after an on-chain vote as they will require a significant change to the existing protocol. 

A **big differentiator for Cardano** is that upgrades are seamless. With most blockchains, upgrades are done via hard forks which are traumatic for the blockchains community. Typically the existing protocol is disabled, new rules are introduced, and the chain is restarted with all the history destroyed. Hard forks are handled very differently by Cardano. Rather than making drastic changes, the Cardano hard fork combinator (HFC) allows for a seamless transition to a new protocol while preserving the history of blocks and causing minimal inconvenience to users.

The **hard fork combinator** is intended to allow the integration of many protocols without requiring major changes. Byron and Shelley era blocks have previously been combined in the Cardano blockchain. For future ‘hard fork events’, Basho and Voltaire blocks will be combined as well - all as a single property. The (HFC) hard fork combinator continues to prove itself with more gradual, iterative upgrades planned. These events result in negligible, if any, user disruption. 
