**What is Ouroboros?**

In Greek mythology, Ouroboros is a circular symbol depicting a snake swallowing its tail, representing wholeness or infinity of time flowing back into itself in an eternal cycle of life, death and rebirth. So what is the connection with all this philosophical talk and the proof of stake consensus protocol that powers Cardano? In a blockchain context, Ouroboros represents the protocol constantly feeding itself from previous epochs, and regenerating, kind of like eating its own tail.

Ouroboros, the first provably secure proof-of-stake protocol, is just one example of Cardano’s meticulous peer-reviewed approach. Ouroboros offers the same strict security guarantees as proof-of-work blockchains such as Bitcoin. It is based on sound foundational research papers which found Ouroboros to be more robust and adaptive to attacks than previous Byzantine fault tolerant (BFT) protocols.

Nakamoto Consensus, named after the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto, combines Proof-of-Work with the 'longest chain' rule.
Ouroboros achieves **nakamoto-style consensus** but is based on proof of stake, achieving the robustness of Bitcoin, but is magnitudes more energy efficient, faster and with a fairer rewards system. Cardano is built on an innovative game theoretic design which discourages one entity gaining too much control, and avoids plutocracy. 

Time is measured on Cardano in epochs and slots. An epoch is a sequence of a fixed number of slots, currently lasting for five days. For each slot, stake pools who are randomly chosen to be the ‘slot leader’ to produce one or more blocks. Blocks are then propagated to the network within the allocated slot time. There is a reliable randomness in the selection of slot leaders, crucial in preventing network attacks while also incentivizing honest stakeholders. In Ouroboros, randomness is generated by using a Verifiable Random Function, a major cryptographic breakthrough in 1999 and still used widely today to produce a random output, with a proof that anyone can use to verify the result. When reviewing a stake pool's performance, it’s best to zoom out and note that it will generally receive more slots in some epochs, and fewer slots in others, but will average out over in the longer term.

Cardano’s rigorous scientific approach and proven track record make it a reliable foundation for enterprise-grade blockchain solutions. To date, Cardano has achieved 100% uptime, second only to Bitcoin which launched years before. This is not always the case with other chains where hacks, outages and restarts are well documented.
