Cardano is a proof-of-stake blockchain that requires a fraction of the power required for proof-of-work blockchains. According to the Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index, the hardware that runs Bitcoin uses as much energy each year as a country such as Norway or Sweden. Cardano's ethos is to be as inclusive as possible with a low barrier to entry. Cardano stake pools have been run on Rock Pi as far back as 2019.

What is staking? Staking is crucial to securing the network. It is the process where ada holders delegate to their funds to a stake pool and earn staking rewards in return. Any ada holder can run their own node which acts as a validator, processing transactions and adding new blocks to the chain. On Cardano, these are known as stake pool operators. The more ada staked, the stronger the network becomes. Stake pools receive rewards after each epoch, some of which are passed onto delegators. When you delegate your ada, your stake becomes active two epochs later. You will then start receiving rewards directly into your wallet every five days thereafter, hence staking rewards are often referred to as ‘passive income’. 

​​Ouroboros provides a ‘best in class’ staking experience. There are no penalties such as ‘slashing’ where some, or all, of your stake can be revoked as punishment for dishonest behaviour. There are no lock-up (bonding) periods. Rewards are distributed automatically every epoch and your funds are always accessible any time. Staking on Cardano is described as non-custodial, meaning you have sole custody of your ada, and you alone are responsible for securing your wallet. When you delegate your ada, your stake is never at risk of being taken by the stake pool operator, or a third party. This is not always the case with other proof of stake blockchains.


Cardano’s network is very decentralized with over 3,000 globally distributed stake pools. Cardano’s architecture is designed to prevent centralization by using economic incentives that stimulate decentralization. Stake pools naturally want to expand as much as possible, the more delegated stake they attract, the more blocks they would produce. The network is configured to prevent single stake pools from becoming too large. There are a number of parameters that aim to find the optimum balance of stake delegated to an ideal number of stake pools.  

At a high level, the protocol works by ensuring that if a pool attracts more delegated stake than a given threshold, the pool’s payout will fall accordingly. If a pool is said to be saturated in this way, attracting more delegated stake will no longer increase the rewards. The ideal result is a set number of stake pools of approximately equal size. It rarely ends up this way exactly in practice, but it is sufficient motivation for most participants to behave in an honest fashion out of their own self-interest to maximize their rewards. Note nobody’s stake is ever revoked, but you may not be earning full rewards if you try to game the system.

Before we go, we should point out that stake pool operators (SPOs) are the backbone of the Cardano network. The nodes (servers) they run add blocks to the network and validate transactions. A stake pool operator maintains hardware that facilitates the Cardano blockchain and is rewarded accordingly based on stake in the network and pool performance. Staking on Cardano has a very high participation rate compared to other chains. Cardano leverages the successful stake pool model to implement some of the interoperability and governance features we’ll talk about shortly. SPOs essentially become infrastructure providers for rolling out new features released in new node versions. 

