Businesses need some form of balance sheet to maintain an accurate record of cash in, cash out, profit, and other key metrics. Ledgers have been used in double-entry bookkeeping since the 13th century. Blockchain introduced the notion of a shared distributed ledger, an immutable record of all transactions. To achieve this, blockchain networks need an accounting model to record who owns which coins, as well as to identify which ones are spent and unspent. Let’s review the two most common blockchain accounting models and how Cardano has innovated further with the eUTxO model.

A bank’s book keeping model is often used to explain how the account model works. Your balance is a single figure, updated whenever you deposit or withdraw funds. This is analogous to the blockchain account model, where your blockchain address holds a single balance that fluctuates with transactions. Transactions are recorded as debits and credits on different users' accounts on the bank's ledger. 

Account-based blockchains work similarly, except the ledger that records its users’ balances is distributed among many nodes on the network. Note that account-based blockchains track updates to balances, not the actual coins, and balances are stored as a global state, kept by each node and updated with every transaction. The account-based model is a popular blockchain bookkeeping method. Initially introduced with Ethereum, the account model is used today by many other blockchains, such as Algorand, to record transactions and track state changes.

An alternative model is UTXO which stands for unspent transaction output. It’s often explained with ‘cash in, cash out’ analogies. Imagine you're in a book shop, buying goods with physical notes and coins. Every transaction involves handing over specific notes and coins, and your balance reflects the money you have left. This is akin to the UTXO model in blockchains, where individual notes and coins (UTXOs) are tracked to represent your balance. Bitcoin uses the UTXO model.

Cardano adds programmability to Bitcoin’s proven UTXO model with its extended UTXO (eUTXO) ledger model where smart contracts allow developers to build dApps with custom logic, while still maintaining security. With eUTXO, metadata and scripts are bundled together in a single transaction for greater throughput. Transaction verification is simpler, so you can predict what’s going to happen, including how much a transaction will cost. Transactions can be verified locally off-chain, and there is no dependence on the rest of the network. A developer can focus on the transaction itself, and its inputs. Unlike Ethereum, if a transaction fails, no fee is charged. 

Crucially, Cardano's eutxo model can process multiple transactions from a single transaction. This changes the entire context for  metrics like transactions per second. Users can also send multiple assets to several wallets in a single transaction, thus cutting transaction fees even more. We will look at this ‘transactions per transaction’ concept closely in a future video. 

